The youth are our greatest asset

vukuzenzele unnamed

On June 16th 1976, the youth of Soweto and other parts of the country rose up against the iniquity of Bantu Education.
 On that day and in the days that followed, many lost their lives. They were killed by a callous regime that had little regard for black lives and thought nothing of opening fire on unarmed, uniformed schoolchildren.  These events hardened international opinion against the apartheid regime and gave further impetus to the liberation struggle.Young people have always been at the forefront of social protest, from the anti-au-thoritarian protests in Latin America in the late 1950s, to the protests across Africa in the late 1960s. History faithfully records the contribution of the gen-eration of 1976 to the interna-tional student movement and its stance against oppression and injustice. This historic event 45 years ago continues to be commem-orated across Africa and the world. It is therefore disturbing that knowledge of June 16th is diminishing among young South Africans. This is particularly so among the so-called Generation Z, or young people born between 1997 and 2015. The 2019/2020 South Afri-can Social Attitudes Survey published by the Human Sciences Research Council found that close to 40% of Generation Z has not heard of the historical events of June 16th. A similar percentage has heard about it but knows very little or nothing about it.  Nevertheless, the survey also found that young people of this generation are open to learning about key historical events and believe in their continued importance.  We need to do more as a country to ensure that the message of 1976 is transmit-ted faithfully.  This is a collective responsi-bility of government, schools, tertiary institutions, parents, families, musicians, artists, and all of society.  The generation that was born after apartheid ended inherited a country with a democratic Constitution and where fundamental freedoms are protected.The opportunities young black people have today are both vastly different and greatly improved. Keeping the story of June 16th alive is a reminder to to-day’s generation of the great sacrifices made to secure their freedom. Youth Day is a reminder of the immense power and agency that young people have to create a better future for themselves. The struggles of young people in South Africa today are many. Young people have remained at the forefront of activism, whether in pursuit of free education or against social ills like gender-based violence. Today the greatest struggle young people wage is against unemployment, which has worsened under the COV-ID-19 pandemic.  Creating more opportuni-ties for young people, and access to these opportunities, is government’s foremost priority. Everything that we do as a government contributes towards improving the lives of young people. Tackling youth unemploy-ment requires accelerating economic growth, particular-ly in labour-intensive sectors, and building the capability of the state to fulfil its develop-mental role. We are also driving this agenda through targeted interventions. These include the Presidential Employment Stimulus, which has provid-ed work opportunities and livelihoods support for many young people. We have launched a range of additional measures to create opportunities, enhance skills development, support young entrepreneurs and enable the full participation of young people in the econ-omy.This includes the establish-ment of a National Pathway Management Network, SA Youth, to make it easier for young people to view and access opportunities and re-ceive active support to find pathways into the labour market. These are among the priori-ties of the Presidential Youth Employment Intervention, which was launched just weeks before we entered a national lockdown last year and which is now entering full implementation.The Presidential Youth Em-ployment Intervention was built on the understanding that addressing the youth un-employment crisis requires innovative thinking and strong partnerships across society. Its ultimate objective is to find models that work, whether in skills develop-ment or active labour market policies, and to scale these rapidly to reach as many young people as possible.Most importantly, it recog-nises that young people must be at the centre of any effort to boost youth employment. Young people are our great-est asset, and our greatest weapon in this fight.We salute the resilience of every young person playing their part to build and devel-op this country. They are the young people volunteering in our commu-nities, building our country through the Presidential Employment Stimulus, run-ning their own businesses and studying to better them-selves.They are the young people who are forging their own path and bringing their fam-ilies along with them.We salute young people who keep working to im-prove their lives. Young people are doing their part; they need government, and indeed all of society, to do ours.Our country is going through the most difficult of times, but we are working daily to expand the frontiers of hope. We are seeing the green shoots of growth in our economy, and are confident this will translate to better opportunities for all. Our task now is to ensure that young people are ready and able to access these opportunities, and to create their own.
