

==================================================================================================================

Page:3

3Vuk’uzenzeleLet us unite in our fight against Covid-19The entire world is in the unrelenting grip of the coronavirus pandemic, whose spread has been rapid. A vaccine has yet to be found. Across the world, over 3.4 million people are known to be infected and more than 240,000 have died. These are indeed desperate times.
When the national state of disaster was declared six weeks ago, South Africa only had 61 confirmed coronavirus infections. Despite the relatively low number, expert opinion and international experience indicated that infec tions would rise exponentially. I said that urgent and drastic measures would need to be taken.Those measures – which included a nation-wide lockdown and the closure of our borders – have proved to be effective in delaying the spread of the disease. This has been possible because most South Africans have adhered to the lockdown provisions, practising social distancing and wearing face masks. I applaud you for this and for all the other sacrifices you have made.At this stage in the progress of the pandemic, other countries had far more infections than we do. As of now – which is 46 days since we recorded our 100th coronavirus case – we have 6,783 confirmed cases. Italy, which has a similar size population to ours, had more than 140,000 cases and the United States had around 700,000 confirmed cases at the 46-day mark.But this does not mean that the danger has passed. We have not nearly reached the peak of infections in South Africa. All the scientific models show that the infection rate will continue to rise at a much faster rate in the next few months.However, the speed with which the virus spreads and the number of people who are ultimately infected will be determined by what we do now. That is why the easing of the lockdown needs to be gradual and cautious. It is for this reason that many regulations need to remain in place and why it is absolutely essential that people observe them. I know how difficult this is and I understand the concern that many of our compatriots have about how these regulations are interfering and limiting their rights. But all this is necessary. Our overriding objective is the preservation of life.Social distancing and proper hygiene are still our best and only defences in this struggle. This is what informs the regulations we have put in place for level 4 of our response. Our considerations are based on empirical evidence, scientific and economic data and international best practice. In the 1995 judgment of the Constitutional Court that out-lawed capital punishment, Jus tice Arthur Chaskalson wrote: “The rights to life and dignity are the most important of all human rights and the source of all other personal rights. By committing ourselves to a society founded on the recognition of human rights we are required to value these two rights above all others.”The regulations we have put in place are founded on that commitment to life and dignity, and which justify – in these extreme circumstances – temporary restrictions on other rights, like freedom of movement and association.In doing this, South Africa is not unlike many other countries.An estimated one-fifth of the world’s population is under quarantine or nationwide lockdown, with this number growing rapidly in response to rising infections. This includes countries with substantially larger populations than ours, like India with its 1.5 billion people.Dozens of countries have imposed curfews such as the one that is now in place here. Limitations on movement are in place in a number of countries. In the UK and the French capital, Paris, public exercise is limited to certain hours and within a certain distance of one’s home.Containment and prevention measures similar to ours are in place in a number of countries. For example, alcohol sales during lockdown have been either restricted or banned in a number of territories and by local governments, including parts of Mexico, Hong Kong and Greenland, which last month imposed a ban on alcohol sales during lockdown to limit infection but also ‘to curb violence against women and children.’There has been much public comment on government’s decision to extend the prohibition on the sale of tobacco products into level 4. A decision like this is bound to be controversial, but it is wrong to suggest that there are Ministers or a President doing and saying whatever they want on this matter.On 23 April, I announced that cigarette sales would be permitted during level 4. This was based on the view of the National Coronavirus Command Council (NCCC), and which was contained in the draft framework that was published for consulation.After careful consideration and discussion, the NCCC reconsidered its position on tobacco. As a result, the regulations ratified by Cabinet and announced by Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma on 29 April extended the prohibition.This was a collective decision and the public statements by both myself and the Minister were done on behalf of, and mandated by, the collective I lead.Every regulation we have put in place has been carefully considered. Along the way there has been consultation with medical experts, various constituencies and different industries. We have been guided by international bodies and the experience of other countries.The reality is that we are sailing in unchartered waters. There is still a great deal about the epidemiology of the virus that is unknown. It is better to err on the side of caution than to pay the devastating price of a lapse in judgment in future. While there are differing views on some of the decisions we have taken – and in some instances these have polarised opinion – government is making every effort to act in a way that advances the rights to life and dignity of all our people.Listening to our people and their concerns during this period has been one of the distinguishing features of how we as government have managed this pandemic. We continue to listen to the concerns of our people and are prepared to make adjustments that balance people’s concerns about the challenges they face with the need to save lives.At this difficult time, our collective energies must be focused on ensuring that health and life is preserved, that the delivery of food, water, health care, social security and social support is not disrupted.
Under these extraordinary circumstances, as government, as individuals and as society we will at times make mistakes. When these occur, we will correct them. But we must carry on, losing neither our nerve nor our resolve.The situation in which we find ourselves demands courage and patience. It requires goodwill and trust between you, the citizen, and your gov-ernment, and between each other.FROM THE UNION BUILDINGS
  3 Vuk’uzenzeleHelp for our vulnerable citizensMany countries around the world have imposed coronavirus lockdowns with a view to saving the lives of their citizens. We have done the same in our country, but our lockdown has revealed a very sad fault line in our society that reveals how grinding poverty, inequality and unemployment is tearing the fabric of our commu-nities apart.
There can be no greater anguish than that of a parent whose children cry out to them for food, but they have none to give.There can be no greater injus-tice than a society where some live in comfort and plenty, while others struggle at the margins to survive with little or nothing at all.Yes, these are the residual ef-fects of a fractured and unequal past. But they are also a symp-tom of a fundamental failing in our post-apartheid society. The nationwide lockdown in response to the coronavirus has gravely exarcerbated a long-standing problem.Over the past few weeks, we have been confronted with distressing images of desper-ate people clamouring for food parcels at distribution centres and of community protests against food shortages.We have also had to contend with allegations both disturb-ing and disgusting. A number of provinces have received re-ports that callous individuals, some of them allegedly govern-ment oﬃ cials, are hoarding or selling food parcels earmarked for the needy and destitute, or diverting them to their friends and families.If there is found to be sub-stance to these allegations we will deal with the individuals concerned harshly.With the declaration of a na-tional state of disaster and the imposition of a nation-wide lockdown we entered un-charted waters. South Africa has never had to deal with a public health emergency of this magnitude.We had to act quickly to save lives. And we must acknowl-edge that in the days and weeks that have followed, the provision of support to our country’s most vulnerable citizens has been slower than required, and that lapses have occurred.However, the payment of social grants has proceeded relatively smoothly, and after a number of technical challeng-es, the food distribution system is being streamlined.Imposing a nationwide lockdown at very short notice presented several challenges. We have had to weigh up the proportionality of the national response and the extent of restrictions we would need to impose.We ultimately chose to err on the side of caution. And as the presentation by the Ministry of Health indicated recently, enforcing a lockdown at the time we did has slowed down the rate of infection and, more importantly, bought us time to prepare for a probable surge in infections in the coming weeks and months.We had to consider the impact on an already floundering economy in both the long and short term, and the impact of this substantial disruption on the livelihoods of millions of people.We had to consider what weeks of confinement to the home would mean for the employed not paid regular salaries, for the unemployed and those seeking work, for those in casual or seasonal employment, for those in the informal sector, for the indigent and for the vulnerable.Cabinet will ﬁ  nalise a set of measures to respond to the impact of the lockdown on the livelihoods of our people. This has been preceded by a range of engagements with a number of stakeholders includ-ing business, labour, religious organisations, civil society and the Presidential Economic Ad-visory Council.The social partners have put forward a number of pro-posals on interventions that could address the immediate vulnerability of the poorest of the poor, most of whom rely on social assistance to survive.We will scale up welfare pro-vision during this period to help households living below the poverty line.Even when the nation-wide lockdown is lifted, its eﬀ  ects will continue to be felt for some time to come.Those fortunate to have a steady income will be able to return to their jobs; but for millions of others this will be a lost month where they would otherwise have found tempo-rary work, done business in the informal sector or saved money earned to meet their family responsibilities. Food support is a short-term emergency measure. It will need to be matched by sus-tainable solutions that help our most vulnerable citizens weather the diﬃ cult times that are still to come.I wish to thank the many NGOs, religious groups and ordinary citizens who are do-nating money and volunteer-ing to help feed the hungry and destitute.Alleviating hunger is not an act of charity. It is an imperative for any society that is founded on respect for human rights.We are at a point in our bat-tle with the pandemic where complacency could prove disastrous. I call on each and every one to remain vigilant, to continue to abide by the regulations, and to keep safe and keep others safe.As government we will be providing information on the direct interventions we are taking to shield our most vul-nerable citizens from the grim prospect of starvation.Among the many diﬃ culties our people face at this time, wondering where their next meal will come from should not be one of them.FROM THE UNION BUILDINGS May 2020 Edition 1May 2020 Edition 2