CACH connects students with learning opportunities

Silusapho Nyanda

Young people who have not yet secured spots at higher education institutions can turn to the Central Application Clearing House (CACH) system for help.
CACH is an online government service managed by the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET). The service helps those who need access to university, technical and vocational education and training (TVET) colleges and skills development opportunities.
“CACH services have been available from 24 January 2022, and will close on 31 March, to assist those who need to enter tertiary education but face challenges with getting space,” says Minister of Higher Education and Training Dr Blade Nzimande. CACH can help those who applied for admission to a university or a college on time in 2021, but were not offered a place in a programme of their choice.
The DHET explained that this usually happens when the applicant does not meet the necessary requirements or the institution has reached its limit on the number of students it can enrol.
CACH can also help those who applied to a higher learning institution and were accepted, but now want to change their courses.
CACH will refer individuals to career development services and where possible, provide an opportunity for them to be considered for spaces still available at universities, TVET colleges or Sector Education and Training Authority (SETA) learnerships, without having to travel to any institution. All public universities, TVET colleges and SETAs can access the CACH database to search for individuals who meet the criteria for available spaces.
“Institutions select individuals from the CACH database and make direct contact with those they have selected,” says DHET spokesperson Ishmael Mnisi.
Applicants who sign up for CACH must submit their details, including their preferred fields of study.
Applicants have options to accept or reject study offers on the CACH system.
Institutions of higher learning will only be able to access applicants’ information from CACH once applicants have signed up and uploaded their Grade 12 results. Mnisi says CACH also helps prospective students who are undecided about career choices by referring them to DHET’s Khetha Career Development Service.