Avoid becoming a human trafficking victim

Silusapho Nyanda

As the number of human trafficking cases being reported increases, it is important that you take steps to ensure your safety.
To avoid becoming a victim of trafficking, you should avoid travelling alone at night or on deserted streets.It is important that you are aware of your surroundings at all times. Being alert will help spot something that is out of place. If you notice a person or a car following you, find a crowded place and contact the police or someone you trust immediately.Traffickers often use the promise of a job to kidnap their victims and will approach potential victims offering them a job or some kind of opportunity. This form of trafficking can happen anywhere – even on social media, at school, in the mall and outside your house.Make sure you conduct thorough research on potential employers before going to meet them in person for interviews. This can be done by verifying that the company really exists by checking with the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission. You should also tell some one you trust when you are going to an interview and arrange for them to call you after a certain amount of time. If possible, have someone go with you.  Be careful when using social media, especially when a stranger offers to help, offers money, a place to stay or a job opportunity in response to something you posted.If you are going out to meet someone new, do so at a public place and let someone you trust know where you are.When going out with children, keep them close and make sure you can see them at all times.You should never send a child on an errand without a trusted adult to watch over them. Get into the habit of checking in on your children regularly, so you know where they are.
 For more information on human trafficking, contact the National Human  Trafficking Hotline on:  0800 222 777. To report  human trafficking contact the police on 10111.This information was  supplied  by the Department of Justice and Constitutional  Development 


