The ins and outs  of ADHD and ADD

Silusapho Nyanda

THERE IS HELP available for children who suffer from attention deficit and hyperactivity disorders.
THE BRAINS OF PRESCHOOL children grow at an incredible rate and help lay the foundations of language, thinking and social and emotional development.
Children from Upington in the Northern Cape are benefiting from 10 early childhood development (ECDs) centres recently launched by the Department of Social Develop ment (DSD).
Five-year-old Lithemba Bacela, who lives with cerebral palsy and has a speech impairment, is better able to indicate what she feels and needs, thanks to her time at one of these centres, Oasis Skills Development Centre’s ECD unit. Lithemba lives in Paballelo with her mother, Elizabeth Bacela, who says her child’s communication skills have improved since she started at the centre last year. Elizabeth said the stimulation area has been particularly beneficial.“Lithemba can now indicate when she is thirsty, hungry or has wet herself.”The Oasis ECD centre is one of 10 that received new buildings from the National Lotteries Commission (NLC) as part of the commission’s Legacy Project. This countrywide initiative is aligned with the National Development Plan’s commitment to improving education, innovation and training, and ensuring that all children have at least two years of preschool education.The centre accommodates children who live with a variety of conditions, including autism, down syndrome, cerebral palsy and foetal alcohol syndrome. Each of the four classes at the ECD centre has 10 to 15 pupils, says Acting Chairperson of Oasis Skills Development Centre Marina Johannesen.The department contributes a subsidy of R20 per child, which covers children between the ages of two and seven and those who are 18 years of age and above. In 2015, the DSD donated a stimulation centre, computer lab and a bus to transport pupils to and from school.“Once a week, therapists from the local hospital come to the centre to assess and treat the children,”says Johannesen. The new building, donated recently is an additional blessing for the centre. Speaking at the launch, Social Development Deputy Minister Hendrietta Bogopane-Zulu called on the public to include children living with disabilities in dialogues about issues that affect them.Silusapho NyandaIf a child who suffers from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or attention deficit disorder (ADD) is not treated, the conditions could have long-term negative impacts on their health. This is according to Dr Khatija Jhazbhay, who heads up the Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Unit at Townhill Hospital in Pietermaritzburg, KwaZulu-Natal.
She explained that as adults, these children could be at an increased risk of other mental conditions, such as anxiety and depression, and could also mis-use substances. ADHD and ADD affect chil-dren’s academic progress and their behaviour could annoy others. Children could also be disliked, get into trouble and be prone to accidents. “Each child’s circumstances are unique and developing, so it’s important to do a com-prehensive clinical assessment to recognise other factors that could be impacting their development, as well as the strengths that can be built on to assist them to reach their full potential,” said Dr Jhazbhay.She explained that ADHD and ADD are neurodevelopmental disorders that present with behavioural difficulties, such as inattention. This shows in the form of:
• making careless mistakes• not completing tasks• losing things• being easily distracted and forgetful Examples of hyperac-tivity or impulsiveness include:
• fidgeting• tapping hands or feet• squirming in their seat• blurting out answers and getting up when expected to remain seated.“Symptoms present in two or more settings – at home, school, with friends or relatives or dur-ing other activities – and inter-fere with social, occupational or school functioning. Severe symptoms present before the age of 12 and must be present for at least six months. Teachers are able to pick up behaviour difficulties and can refer a child for clinical assess-ment. There are treatment op-tions that can be considered.


